feat: support storing page-level stats (#1316)
lancedb/lance: docs/format.rst

3. ``PUT_EXTERNAL_STORE base_uri, version, mydataset.lance/_versions/{version}.manifest`` update the external store to point to the final manifest
4. ``RETURN mydataset.lance/_versions/{version}.manifest`` always return the finalized path, return error if synchronization fails

Statistics
----------

Statistics are stored within Lance files. The statistics can be used to determine
which pages can be skipped within a query. The null count, lower bound (min),
and upper bound (max) are stored.

Statistics themselves are stored in Lance's columnar format, which allows for
selectively reading only relevant stats columns.

Statistic values
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Three types of statistics are stored per column: null count, min value, max value.
The min and max values are stored as their native data types in arrays.

There are special behavior for different data types to account for nulls:

For integer-based data types (including signed and unsigned integers, dates,
and timestamps), if the min and max are unknown (all values are null), then the
minimum/maximum representable values should be used instead.

> For float data types, if the min and max are unknown, then use ``-Inf`` and ``+Inf``,

Reviewer: What if the underlying data has `-Inf` or `+Inf`?

Reviewer 2: I imagine the reader wouldn't be affected?

Author: Those are known values and can also be recorded as min and/or max.

respectively. ``NaN`` values should be ignored for the purpose of min and max
statistics. If the max value is zero (negative or positive), the max value
should be recorded as ``+0.0``. Likewise, if the min value is zero (positive
or negative), it should be recorded as ``-0.0``.

For binary data types, if the min or max are unknown or unrepresentable, then use
null value. Binary data type bounds can also be truncated. For example, an array
containing just the value ``"abcd"`` could have a truncated min of

> ``"abc"`` and max of ``"abd"``. If there is no truncated value greater than the

Reviewer 2: Is the length we're truncating to settable?

Author: I think we could implement that later. For now I leave it unspecified in the spec what length or even whether we always do. That can be a detail of implementations, I think.

maximum value, then instead use null for the maximum.

.. warning::

    The ``min`` and ``max`` values are not guaranteed to be within the array;
    they are simply upper and lower bounds. Two common cases where they are not
    contained in the array is if the min or max original value was deleted and
    when binary data is truncated. Therefore, statistic should not be used to
    compute queries such as ``SELECT max(col) FROM table``, except to identify

>     which pages and files definitely do not contain the min or max value.

Reviewer: I'm not sure you can even use stats alone to determine which files definitely do not contain the min or max value.

In other words, if you have two files and one has min: 0, max: 100 and the other has min: 50, max: 200 and the query is `SELECT max(col) FROM table` then you still have to read both files because the 200 might be deleted and the max may be 100?

Author: Ah point taken. I'll remove that.

Page-level statistics format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Page-level statistics are stored as separate arrays within the Lance file. Each
array is only one page long. The page offsets are stored in an array just like
the data page table. The offset to the statistics page offsets is stored in the

> metadata.

Reviewer: The data is 1 page long but is it also always going to be exactly 1 row?

Author: No, each array is `num_batches` / `num_pages` long. Maybe I should explicitly say that.

The schema for the statistics is:

.. code-block::

    <field_id_1>: struct
        null_count: i64
        min_value: <field_1_data_type>
        max_value: <field_1_data_type>
    ...
    <field_id_N>: struct
        null_count: i64
        min_value: <field_N_data_type>
        max_value: <field_N_data_type>

Any number of fields may be missing, as statistics for some fields or of some
kind may be skipped. In addition, readers should expect there may be extra
fields that are not in this schema. These should be ignored. Future changes to
the format may add additional fields, but these changes will be backwards
compatible.

However, writers should not write extra fields that aren't described in this

> document. Until they are defined the specification, there is no guarantee that
> writers will be able to safely interpret new forms of statistics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
document. Until they are defined in the specification, there is no guarantee that
readers will be able to safely interpret new forms of statistics.
```
